### Task descriptions
# For solution notes, scroll below

### --- Day 6: Tuning Trouble ---
The preparations are finally complete; you and the Elves leave camp on foot and begin to make your way toward the star fruit grove.

As you move through the dense undergrowth, one of the Elves gives you a handheld device. He says that it has many fancy features, but the most important one to set up right now is the communication system.

However, because he's heard you have significant experience dealing with signal-based systems, he convinced the other Elves that it would be okay to give you their one malfunctioning device - surely you'll have no problem fixing it.

As if inspired by comedic timing, the device emits a few colorful sparks.

To be able to communicate with the Elves, the device needs to lock on to their signal. The signal is a series of seemingly-random characters that the device receives one at a time.

To fix the communication system, you need to add a subroutine to the device that detects a start-of-packet marker in the datastream. In the protocol being used by the Elves, the start of a packet is indicated by a sequence of four characters that are all different.

The device will send your subroutine a datastream buffer (your puzzle input); your subroutine needs to identify the first position where the four most recently received characters were all different. Specifically, it needs to report the number of characters from the beginning of the buffer to the end of the first such four-character marker.

For example, suppose you receive the following datastream buffer:

mjqjpqmgbljsphdztnvjfqwrcgsmlb

After the first three characters (mjq) have been received, there haven't been enough characters received yet to find the marker. The first time a marker could occur is after the fourth character is received, making the most recent four characters mjqj. Because j is repeated, this isn't a marker.

The first time a marker appears is after the seventh character arrives. Once it does, the last four characters received are jpqm, which are all different. In this case, your subroutine should report the value 7, because the first start-of-packet marker is complete after 7 characters have been processed.

Here are a few more examples:
```
bvwbjplbgvbhsrlpgdmjqwftvncz: first marker after character 5
nppdvjthqldpwncqszvftbrmjlhg: first marker after character 6
nznrnfrfntjfmvfwmzdfjlvtqnbhcprsg: first marker after character 10
zcfzfwzzqfrljwzlrfnpqdbhtmscgvjw: first marker after character 11
```
How many characters need to be processed before the first start-of-packet marker is detected?


### --- Part Two ---
Your device's communication system is correctly detecting packets, but still isn't working. It looks like it also needs to look for messages.

A start-of-message marker is just like a start-of-packet marker, except it consists of 14 distinct characters rather than 4.

Here are the first positions of start-of-message markers for all of the above examples:
```
mjqjpqmgbljsphdztnvjfqwrcgsmlb: first marker after character 19
bvwbjplbgvbhsrlpgdmjqwftvncz: first marker after character 23
nppdvjthqldpwncqszvftbrmjlhg: first marker after character 23
nznrnfrfntjfmvfwmzdfjlvtqnbhcprsg: first marker after character 29
zcfzfwzzqfrljwzlrfnpqdbhtmscgvjw: first marker after character 26
```
How many characters need to be processed before the first start-of-message marker is detected?

# Solution notes

### Part 1

We will iterate through each character and keep an eye on the last 4 chars. 

One important thing to mention that is a catch is to think what to do if there is a repeating character before we reach the 4 diff chars marker.

For this reason, I will define my checks like this: If I do it to check if the current character is in the buffer set, then if it's true, I'll have to do something immediately after. This is going to cause issues as I dont know the position of the value that repeats and it will complicate things.

Instead, I will pop the first element of the buffer and add the current symbol to the end of it. And only then, I'll check if there is any repeating characters in the buffer. This way it will keep iterating and only stop when there aren't any repeats.

```
 for line in inputfile:
        total_ctr = 0
        buffer = [] # buffer of 4 - ones we're interested in
        for char in line:
            total_ctr += 1
            
            # only after filling up the first 4, start removing and adding to the buffer of 4.
            # if total_ctr is exactly 4, we know its not a marker since we have the input available
            # and the first 4 characters have a repeating symbol within them (r)
            if total_ctr > 4: 
                buffer.remove(buffer[0]) # remove first element
                buffer.append(char) # add current char to the end
                if is_buffer_4_symb_and_diff_chars(buffer):
                    print("marker found at character number: ")
                    print(total_ctr)
                    print(buffer)
                    break
            else:
                buffer.append(char) # add current char to the end
```

And one function to check for uniqueness in the 4-symb buffer:

```
def is_buffer_4_symb_and_diff_chars(buffer):
    if len(buffer) != 4:
        print("wrong buffer size!")
        return False
    if len(buffer) == len(set(buffer)):
        return True
```

This is a great trick, checking the length of the list and the set generated by a list!

And its done! Immediately got the answer.

### For Part 2, I literally just changed the numbers 4, which happen to be in the code twice, to 14, and under a minute I got the Part 2 answer. Isn't that crazy?! This was my fastest programming problem solution submission ever...

In all honesty, the tasks for today were much easier than yesterday's! I took a total of ~15min, including writing this MD file.
